Artiﬁcial Intelligence: Powering Human Exploration of the Moon and Mars
Jeremy D. Frank
NASA Ames Research Center
jeremy.d.frank@nasa.gov

1

Introduction

NASA is committed to landing American astronauts, including the ﬁrst woman and the next man, on the Moon by
2024. Through the agency’s Artemis lunar exploration program, we will use innovative new technologies and systems
to explore more of the Moon than ever before. In support
of this vision, NASA plans to construct Gateway, a habitable spacecraft (Crusan et al. 2018), in the vicinity of the
Moon. Gateway consists of a Habitat, Airlock, Power and
Propulsion Element (PPE), and Logistics module. The PPE
provides orbital maintenance, attitude control, communications with Earth, space-to-space communications, and radio frequency relay capability in support of extravehicular
activity (EVA) communications. The Habitat provides habitable volume and short-duration life support functions for
crew in cislunar space, docking ports, attach points for external robotics, external science and technology payloads or
rendezvous sensors, and accommodations for crew exercise,
science/utilization and stowage. The Airlock provides capability to enable astronaut EVAs as well as the potential to
accommodate docking of additional elements, observation
ports, or a science utilization airlock. A Logistics module
delivers cargo to the Gateway. Figure 1 shows the progression of missions that will ultimately lead to the return to the
Moon. NASA will collaborate with commercial and international partners to establish sustainable missions by 2028.
And then we will use what we learn on and around the Moon
to take the next giant leap - sending astronauts to Mars.
For over 60 years, NASA’s crewed missions have been
conﬁned to the Earth-Moon system, where speed-of-light
communications delays between crew and ground are practically nonexistent. The close proximity of the crew to the
Earth has enabled NASA to operate human space missions
primarily from the Mission Control Center on Earth. This
”ground-centered” mode of operations, with a large, groundbased support team, has had several advantages: the onboard crew could be smaller, the vehicles could be simpler
and lighter, and the mission performed for a lower cost. Despite these advantages, NASA has invested in numerous Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) techniques to make Human Spaceﬂight Mission Control more efﬁcient and effective (Smith et
al. 2014), as well as to automate some functions onboard the
International Space Station (Cornelius and Frank 2016).
Gateway, however, will feature four crew instead of 6 (or

more), and will be occupied for only a few months out of
the year. Small crews cannot take on all Gateway functions
performed by ground today, and so vehicles must be more
automated to reduce the crew workload for such missions. In
addition, both near-term and future missions will feature signiﬁcant periods when crew is not present; Gateway shall provide for autonomous operations for up to 21 days, independent of ground communications, when crew are not present.
The need for autonomy is reﬂected in the Gateway concept
of operations (Crusan et al. 2018) and its requirements, as
well as requirements for the ﬁrst of its components, the PPE
(NASA 2018). Gateway may beneﬁt from robotic assistants
inside the spacecraft, and robots may perform some functions while astronauts are not present. Finally, future missions to Mars will require crew and ground to operate independently from Earth-based Mission Control. A thorough
assessment of human spaceﬂight dormancy and autonomy
requirements for a future Mars mission (Williams-Byrd et
al. 2016) describes the wide range of challenges to be faced.
Due to the mission-critical nature of human spaceﬂight, autonomy technology must be robust and resilient, both to
changes in environment, faults and failures, and also the
somewhat unpredictable nature of human-machine collaboration. Maturing autonomy technologies for use on Gateway, and other Artemis elements, will require early adoption
to choose the best solutions and determine best engineering
practices, and stress the interaction between multiple technologies as well as human-machine interaction.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) is a growing ﬁeld of computational science techniques designed to mimic functions performed by people. Advancements in autonomy will depend
on a portfolio of AI technologies. Automated planning and
scheduling is a venerable ﬁeld of study in AI, and is needed
for a variety of mission planning functions. Plan execution
technology is less well studied, but important for autonomy and robotics. Specialized forms of automated reasoning and machine learning are key technologies to enable
fault management. Over the past decade, the NASA Autonomous Systems and Operations (ASO) project has developed and demonstrated numerous autonomy enabling technologies employing AI techniques. Our work has employed
AI in three distinct ways to enable autonomous mission operations capabilities. Crew Autonomy gives astronauts tools
to assist in the performance of each of these mission oper-

Figure 1: The ﬁrst phase of Artemis will lead to NASA returning humans to the Moon by 2024.
ations functions. Vehicle System Management uses AI techniques to turn the astronaut’s spacecraft into a robot, allowing it to operate when astronauts are not present, or to reduce
astronaut workload. AI technology also enables Autonomous
Robots as crew assistants or proxies when the crew are not
present. When these capabilities are used to enable astronauts to operate autonomously, they must be integrated with
user interfaces, introducing numerous human factors considerations; when these capabilities are used to enable vehicle system management, they must be integrated with ﬂight
software, and run on embedded processors under the control
of real-time operating systems.
We ﬁrst describe human spaceﬂight mission operations
capabilities. The remainder of the paper will describe the
ASO project, and the development and demonstration performed by ASO since 2011. We will describe the AI techniques behind each of these demonstrations, which include a
variety of symbolic automated reasoning and machine learning based approaches. Finally, we conclude with an assessment of future development needs for AI to enable NASA’s
future Exploration missions.

2

Human Spaceﬂight Mission Operations

NASA’s human spaceﬂight mission operations functions are
performed by ﬂight controllers, both before and during missions. For the purposes of this work, we focus on functions
performed during the mission, and break these functions into
Monitoring, Planning, Execution and Fault Management.
Monitoring addresses the following question: What is the
state of the spacecraft? Monitoring requires processing and
abstracting data from sensors. Flight controllers group the
resulting information into displays, both physical and logical, that contain information speciﬁc to major spacecraft system and phases of mission. For instance, power systems data
is monitored by one operator, while attitude and orientation
information is monitored by a different operator. Monitoring
ensures plans are being executed as expected, and the spacecraft state and the state of all relevant systems is known.
Planning addresses the question: What is the spacecraft
doing, and when? Plans are created to achieve speciﬁc objectives. For most spacecraft, plans are created days to weeks

(or even months) ahead of time. Plans are often created for
major spacecraft subsystems separately, then integrated. For
example, a plan to orient the solar arrays of the International
Space Station (ISS) is created independently, by one team of
operators, from the plan for crew activities, which is created
by a second team. These plans must be integrated, and discrepancies resolved, prior to execution. Unexpected events
or faults may require replanning on shorter time scales,
which is discussed in subsequent paragraphs.
Plans are no good unless they are executed. Execution addresses the question: What is the next activity to perform?
When it is performed, what was the outcome? Execution ultimately involves issuing commands to spacecraft subsystems and ensuring results are as expected. Execution for human spacecraft such as the International Space Station also
requires ensuring astronauts have performed their activities
as planned. Execution ultimately is driven by planning, and
results in the need to monitor spacecraft systems to ensure
the results are as expected. If unexpected events occur, replanning may be needed.
Fault management addresses the question: Is something
wrong? If so, what has gone wrong, and what are the impacts? Fault management involves the detection and isolation of faults. Monitoring may provide the ﬁrst indication
of faults or anomalies; anomalies may be the precursors of
faults. Faults often come not as single spies, but in battalions; in such cases, it is important to determine the root
cause of many faults. Fault management also involves determining the consequences of faults. Recovering from or
mitigating faults involves replanning.

3

Autonomous Systems and Operations

NASA’s Autonomous Systems and Operations (ASO)
project1 has extensively demonstrated the use of AI techniques to help monitor, plan, execute, and manage faults for
future human space missions. The ASO project has successfully demonstrated all of these capabilities in all three previously described main areas: Crew Autonomy, Vehicle Systems Management, and Autonomous Robotics. We describe
1
Previously called the Autonomous Mission Operations
project.

ASO’s activity in each of these areas below, emphasizing the
speciﬁc AI techniques in each demonstration. A quantitative
summary of AI techniques used for each demonstration also
appears in the summary (see Figure 6).

3.1

Crew Autonomy

In (Frank et al. 2013), ASO demonstrated the impact of
planning and fault management on mission operations in
the presence of time delay. Mission operation scenarios were
designed for NASA’s Deep Space Habitat (DSH), an analog
spacecraft habitat, covering a range of activities including
nominal objectives, system failures, and crew medical emergencies. The scenarios were simulated at time delay values representative of Lunar (1.2-5 sec), Near Earth Object
(NEO) (50 sec) and Mars (300 sec) missions. Each combination of operational scenario and time delay was tested in a
Baseline conﬁguration, designed to reﬂect present-day operations of the ISS, and a Mitigation conﬁguration in which
AI-based planning and fault management tools, information displays, and crew-ground communications protocols
were employed to assist both crews and Flight Control Team
(FCT) members with mitigating the long-delay conditions.
Cognitive workload of both crewmembers and FCT members generally increased along with increasing time delay.
Autonomy enabling technology decreased the workload of
both ﬂight controllers and crew, and decreased the difﬁculty
of coordinating activities.
The AMO TOCA SSC demonstration (Frank et al. 2015)
demonstrated planning and fault management of two spacecraft systems onboard the International Space Station (ISS).
Astronauts managed the Total Organic Carbon Analyzer
(TOCA), a water quality analyzer, and Station Support Computers (SSC) laptops, which are non-critical crew computer
systems. These systems were selected as representative of
systems a future crew may need to operate autonomously
during a deep space mission. ISS astronauts autonomously
operated these systems (see Figure 2), taking on mission operations functions traditionally performed by support teams
on the ground, using new software tools that provide decision support algorithms for planning, monitoring and fault
management, hardware schematics, system briefs, and data
displays that are normally unavailable to the crew. Managing TOCA required monitoring 22 data items for detecting anomalies, generating plans of up to 6 activities (of 12
possible) subject to 10 constraints, and detecting 70 faults.
Monitoring SSCs required monitoring 161 data items for
faults. The experiment lasted seven months, during which
ISS crews managed TOCA and SSCs on 22 occasions. The
AMO software processed data from TOCA and SSCs continuously during this seven month period. The combined
performance of the software and crew achieved a 88% success rate on managing TOCA activity, the system for which
ground-truth was available.
The AMO EXPRESS and AMO EXPRESS 2.0 demonstrations evaluated plan execution that enable the crew or
ground to activate and de-activate a facility experiment
rack with a single operator action, described in (Stetson et
al. 2015). The auto-procedures perform combined ”core”
(e.g. power, thermal, life support) and payload command-

Figure 2: User interface for AMO TOCA SSC demonstration, showing a TOCA error detected by fault management
displayed for ISS crew.

ing with embedded fault detection and recovery, essentially
performing the speciﬁc operations responsibilities for three
ﬂight controllers. In addition, the auto-procedures were integrated with a Web-based procedure execution monitoring
system.The procedure executes 59 individual commands,
and monitored 236 distinct data items. A ﬁrst demonstration showed that the facility could be powered up and conﬁgured automatically from the ground; a second demonstration showed that the the task could be performed and monitored by astronauts. In both demonstrations, ISS ﬂight controllers scheduled the activity, which the crew performed at
the designated time; the demonstration is being extended to
require that astronauts also decide when to schedule the activity based on a variety of constraints.

Figure 3: Simulated Control Center used to evaluate
ACAWS. Both Flight Controllers and crew have access to
ACAWS output.
ASO developed and tested an automated model-based
fault management called Advanced Caution and Warning
(ACAWS). ACAWS was tested on Orion Exploration Flight
Test 1 (EFT-1) data from prelaunch to post- landing, as described in (Aaseng et al. 2015). The system was tested extensively using nominal test data from the Orion Program
and combined with fault signature data developed by the

ACAWS test team and supported by NASA Flight Operations Directorate. Nominal data was recorded when Orion
test data was transmitted to the Mission Control Center, either from the Orion EFT-1 spacecraft during vehicle checkout, or from Orion test and simulation systems. The ACAWS
system was conﬁgured to detect and display approximately
3500 failure modes, ranging from sensor faults to major
system component failures, monitoring approximately 2500
unique telemetry elements. The system executed on a Linux
laptop at a 1 Hz execution rate. Flight controller evaluation
indicated that the information provided by ACAWS would
be an effective aid in rapidly understanding failures and responding more quickly and accurately with adequate training and familiarity.

3.2

Vehicle System Management

ASO integrated planning, plan execution and fault management technologies into a Vehicle System Manager (VSM)
able to autonomously operate a dormant (uncrewed) space
habitat, described in (Aaseng et al. 2018). These technologies included a fault-tolerant avionics architecture, novel
spacecraft power system and power system controller, and
autonomy software to control the habitat. The power system
controller was developed by a partner project (May et al.
2014), (Csank et al. 2018). The demonstration involved simulation of the habitat and multiple spacecraft sub-systems
(power storage and distribution, avionics, and air-side lifesupport). The foundation of the demonstration was ’quiescent operations’ of a habitat during a 55 minute eclipse
period. For this demonstration, the spacecraft power distribution system and air-side life support system were simulated at a high level of ﬁdelity; additional systems were
managed, but with lower ﬁdelity operational constraints and
system behavior. Operational constraints for real and simulated loads were developed by analyzing on-orbit hardware
and evaluating future Exploration capable technology. A total of 13 real and simulated loads were used during the test.
The VSM monitored 208 parameters, was able to detect and
respond to 159 faults, and managed plans of 312 steps in
the presence of 13 load constraints, 6 power system conﬁguration constraints, and 6 operational constraints (e.g. two
systems must be on or off simultaneously, a system cannot
remain off for more than 30 minutes, etc). Evaluation was
performed with eight scenarios including both nominal and
off- nominal conditions. We have subsequently scaled the
number of loads (to 24), activities, operational constraints
(roughly 50) and fault modes.
ASO has subsequently adapted the ACAWS fault management technology for use by astronauts onboard Orion,
as well as ﬂight controllers; while Orion may be in Earth
proximity, fault management will improve the crew’s situational awareness, and may be important in the event of
loss of communications. In (Aaseng, Sweet, and Ossenfort.
2018), (Aaseng and Frank. 2016) we describe the deployment of ACAWS on an embedded ﬂight computer and a
real-time operating system. The considerably larger size of
the ACAWS fault model, and the larger number of parameters to monitor, make this a more useful stressing case than
the Habitat-based VSM (5000 faults for the current Orion

model versus 159 faults for the Habitat model.)

3.3

Robotics

ASO demonstrated planning and plan execution of a dexterous manipulator performing an ISS-inspired biological
science scenario (Azimi, Zemler, and Morris 2019). The
demonstration system was implemented using the Robot
Operating System (ROS) for inter-process communication
between planning, perception and control, ROSPlan to implement task-level planning and execution, and affordance
templates to perform kinematics and continuous path planning. The test setup utilizes the Sawyer robot with electric
parallel gripper manufactured by Rethink Robotics, and a
mockup ISS experiment facility with objectives such as manipulating test tubes for a science experiment. The combined
system was used to plan activities such as the inspection of
test tubes, simulated activities such as heating and shaking,
sending data to ground to await conﬁrmation to proceed, etc.
Execution of the plans can be disrupted by long wait times,
switching test tube positions, and other unexpected events.
Plans range in size from 50-70 actions; there are 28 distinct
action types, so many actions are repeated in these plans. A
total of 54 predicates describing the robot and experiment
rack state are monitored during execution

4

Artiﬁcial Intelligence Enabling
Autonomous Mission Operations

We describe the speciﬁc AI applications employed by each
ASO demonstration in more detail below.

4.1

Planning and Scheduling

The planner used in (Frank et al. 2015) is custom code designed speciﬁcally to generate new TOCA activities based
on TOCA operating constraints and the current schedule. We
chose this design due to the simplicity of generating a small
set of TOCA activities 2-3 weeks into the future, allowing
us to focus on deployment and system integration with other
AI components needed to manage TOCA.
The VSM planner uses the Solving Constrained Integer
Programs (SCIP) Optimization tool (Achterberg. 2009), an
open-source tool designed to solve constrained optimization problems which combine mixed-integer, and linear programming, and constraint programming methods. We modeled the power loads as jobs to be scheduled. Each job had
periodic constraints to model duty cycles for each load, constraints requiring some loads power mode to be synchronized with each other, and constraints on the maximum instantaneous power demand and total energy consumption
over the 2-hour plan horizon (see Figure 4). As the mission
continued, or when new circumstances (e.g. advancing time,
new goals or constraints, unexpected events, or faults) arise,
the scheduler generates new plans. The SCIP solver is reinvoked every 5 minutes as new information becomes available, or when faults occur.
The planner used in our robotics work is POPF (Coles et
al. 2010), a model-based planner that employs a declarative
action model. Planning problems are formulated by deﬁning
a Plan Domain Description Language (PDDL) 2.1 domain.

Figure 4: VSM planning and replanning in the presence of
power systems faults.

For more information about this form of planning, we refer the reader to (Ghallab, Nau, and Traverso 2004). Plan
actions are mapped to affordance templates, which provide
a way of describing an action that an object affords to the
robot, such as picking up a test tube. The construct of an
affordance template allows multiple methods to achieve different goals for the same objects, e.g. pick an object versus
place an object.

4.2

Execution

The AMO EXPRESS demonstration onboard ISS employed
Timeliner as an executive. Timeliner (Brown et al. 2002)
provides a way to programmatically model human decisions. Its constructs relate directly to the decision processes
made by ISS ﬂight controllers each day concerning such
things as activating and monitoring facilities and payloads
and any other procedural processes. Timeliner has English
language constructs that allow someone with little programmer experience to not only follow and understand execution,
but to write scripts. Timeliner scripts are hierarchically organized. The top level construct, the bundle, is a place holder
for sequences. Within each bundle there has to be at least one
sequence, which is the executable code that can start executing autonomously or by ground commanding. In addition
to the natural language control constructs and the hierarchical nature of bundles and sequences, Timeliner is well integrated with the ISS command and telemetry system, making
integration with ISS ﬂight software quite straightforward.
The VSM demonstration employed The Plan Execution and Interchange Language (PLEXIL) as an executive.
PLEXIL was developed as a collaborative effort by NASA
and Carnegie Mellon University, and subsequently released
as open-source software (Verma et al. 2006). PLEXIL is
a language for representing ﬂexible robust plans intended
to be executed in an uncertain and changing environment.
PLEXIL provides numerous conditions to control the ex-

ecution of plan elements, including loops and hierarchical decomposition, and provides internal plan element state
tracking that can be used natively as part of control logic.
PLEXIL provides well deﬁned execution semantics with
contingency handling which can be formally validated and
produces deterministic results given the same sequence of
environmental inputs. PLEXIL’s Execution Engine (executive) executes stored plans written in the PLEXIL language;
it can load new plans during execution.
The Robotics work employs ROSPlan as an executive.
ROSPlan contains a Knowledge Base that manages the
evolving state of the world and interprets a model for planning. The deliberative layers consist of a ROSPlan manager
(RPM), that commands and monitors the Knowledge Base,
and the planning system for generating and executing task
plans. The plan dispatcher commands and receives feedback
from the robot behavior components, which are themselves
composed of sequences of simple actions, and updates the
Knowledge Base. ROSPlan components were designed with
a one to one relationship to the actions in the PDDL domain
model. When ROSPlan dispatched an action to the desired
component, the component would invoke the behavior required for completing the action. Upon successful completion of the behavior, we would update the ROSPlan Knowledge Base with the effects of the action, using sensor data as
veriﬁcation prior to updating as applicable.

4.3

Fault Management

Both our VSM work and our Orion fault management work
employ the Testability Engineering and Maintenance System (Real Time) (TEAMS-RT) (Mathur, Deb, and Pattipati
1998) software as a foundation. TEAMS models consist of
components, fault modes for each component, a component interconnection model representing transfer of capability (e.g. ﬂow of current or data), and a set of (logical) tests.
Each test is associated with a set of fault modes it is able
to identify, which is a function of the inter-connectivity of
components. Tests can pass, fail or be unknown. TEAMSRT correlates test points with failure modes. A failed test
can implicate one or more failure modes, while a passing
test exonerates failures. With sufﬁcient data, a single failure mode can be identiﬁed that is responsible for all failed
tests, and an unambiguous failure mode is identiﬁed. Otherwise, TEAMS determines the smallest set of possible failure
modes that could be responsible for failed tests and presents
an ambiguity group of possible failures. TEAMS on its own
performs fault isolation, but requires upstream processing to
transform sensor data from systems into test pass-fail inputs.
While TEAMS is commercial software, we created the upstream code for VSM and Orion fault detection.
The Fault Impacts Reasoner (FIR) determines the resultant impacts of conﬁrmed failures (Aaseng et al. 2015). Impacts include the loss of function due to a fault, such as the
components that have lost electrical power due to a fault in
the electrical system. The loss of redundancy due to a fault
is also determined. Most critical functions in spacecraft depend on redundancy to assure the availability of the function
in spite of failures. Of particular concern is any function that
could be lost by a single additional failure, or has become

zero-fault tolerant. Fault impacts are determined by tracing the inter-connectivity graph from the faulty component,
identifying loss of capability along component interconnections. When there are multiple paths between components,
loss of redundancy is also computed. While FIR’s reasoning
algorithm was implemented by NASA, it uses the TEAMS
model as a foundation.
The TOCA crew autonomy demonstration and the VSM
demonstration used the Hybrid Diagnosis Engine (HyDE)
(Narasimham and Brownstone 2007) for fault detection and
isolation. HyDE uses hybrid (combined discrete and continuous) models and sensor data from the system being diagnosed to deduce the evolution of the state of the system
over time, including changes in state indicative of faults.
HyDE models are state transition diagrams, showing how
events change system state; these events can be nominal (e.g.
commands and processes) or faults. When the sensor data
are no longer consistent with the nominal mode transitions,
HyDE determines what failure mode or modes are now consistent with the data. While HyDE requires some preprocessing of system sensor data, HyDE can take general inputs (commands, numerical values) from systems, making it
more powerful than TEAMS-RT, but more computationally
expensive. In contrast with TEAMS, HyDE can represent
hybrid systems, i.e. mixes of discrete and continuous quantities; TEAMS, by contrast, can only model discrete systems.
Anomaly detection was performed for TOCA and for batteries during an early VSM demonstration. Anomaly detection is performed using two linked algorithms. The Inductive Monitoring System (IMS) (Iverson 2004) is used to
learn a model of the nominal performance of a system using
recorded data gathered from prior runs via clustering. Once
the clusters are created, new instances of system device behavior can be compared to the previously learned behavior,
and the distances δ(b, c) are computed. In previous incarnations of IMS, if the new vector b is ’too far away’ from all
clusters, an anomaly is declared. The Meta-Monitoring System (MMS) generalizes this idea by computing the probability distribution of the cluster distances of the training data; if
the new vectors’ distance from all clusters is ’too unlikely’
according to this probability distribution, an anomaly is declared (Frank et al. 2015).

5

Autonomy Technology Interaction
Paradigms

ASO’s Crew Autonomy demonstrations onboard ISS required considerable systems integration. Fortunately, most
of the applications were run on laptop computers and mobile devices (see Figure 5) used by ISS crew, and served by
Linux and Windows servers. Containerization and performance considerations were still important to observe, and
the operating systems, packages, and supporting software
were limited, complicating integration efforts. AMO EXPRESS also required a non-trivial interface to the Timeliner
software, which runs in an embedded computer onboard
ISS. These integration efforts did not speciﬁcally complicate
the use of our AI applications, but did require signiﬁcant engineering, testing, and safety certiﬁcation effort.

Figure 5: Astronauts using AMO TOCA SSC application
on iPad, September 2014.

Crew Autonomy demonstrations were not only designed
to show that our AI algorithms can solve computationally
challenging problems; they were designed to provide decision support to astronauts. The user interfaces for each of
these demonstrations were designed in conjunction with user
studies conducted by human factors engineers; see (Frank
et al. 2017), (Aaseng et al. 2015) for some of the results
of these user interface evaluations. The on-orbit demonstrations also provided data evaluated by human factors engineers. Each lesson learned provides guidance and feedback
for the design of these decision support tools. Sometimes,
the lessons learned were surprising. For instance, crews put
a lot of trust into the software recommendations, and were
likely to follow the software’s recommendations. A limitation with automation software is that it is only as good
as the knowledge coded within it, and this knowledge is
initially based upon pre-ﬂight characterization of hardware
performance; mistakes in the software will lead the user
astray. Each demonstration provides insight into which features are used, and which are not. Simplifying an application
may imply exposing information on demand only, a lesson
learned from repeated ISS rack powerup and conﬁguration
demonstrations. In other cases, an AI technology was not
deemed useful; anomaly detection performed for TOCA did
not prompt direct action for the crew, and was generally disregarded, so it has not been used in further demonstrations.
Vehicle Systems Management autonomy technology is integrated with ﬂight software, which in turn interfaces directly with vehicle hardware. The core Flight System (cFS)
is a platform and project independent reusable software
framework and set of reusable software applications (McComas, Wilmot, and Cudmore 2016). There are three key
aspects to the cFS architecture: a dynamic run-time environment, layered software, and a component based design.
Autonomy applications are treated as new components and
integrated with cFS via existing messages; component interaction is handled via deﬁning new messages between components. CFS components are integrated via a message bus;
components can publish or subscribe to the message bus.
Hardware systems data (e.g. currents, pressure, temperature,
etc.) is published to the bus, and received by Fault Manage-

ment (ACAWS, HyDE, IMS/MMS). Fault management, in
turn, generates messages that are consumed by the executive
(PLEXIL) and planner (SCIP). PLEXIL issues commands
by publishing messages that are subscribed to by the hardware. Integration challenges include orchestration of autonomy components via messages; extraction of the right information from hardware system messages; and, last but not
least, ensuring complex algorithms do not use too many resources (CPU or memory) on embedded processors.

6

Related Work

NASA has previously invested in AI technologies for use
in Mission Control (Smith et al. 2014). Many of the technologies developed for use in Mission Control laid the technological foundation for the autonomy work described in
this paper. Methods to mitigate the impacts of time delay on
mission operations are evaluated in (Rader et al. 2013). An
investigation into crew autonomy focused on how to write
procedures for astronauts to follow that reduce the need for
assistance from Mission Control (Beisert et al. 2013). This
investigation did not use special technology to assist astronauts in following procedures, but focused instead on writing guidelines, formatting, and information content. NASA
conducted a series of crew self-scheduling demonstrations
(Marquez et al. 2017) using Web-based technology to allow
astronauts to build a daily activity plan and then perform
the activities in this plan. Timeliner has been extensively
used to automate payload operations, and some additional
activities, onboard ISS (Cornelius and Frank 2016). Sciencedriven extra-vehicular activity (EVA) was extensively studied during the recently completed BASALT project; a discussion of EVA operations planning and execution tools is
provided in (Beaton et al. 2019). Finally, the Astrobee freeﬂying robot onboard ISS is capable of path and motion planning, image recognition, and hazard avoidance, all of which
are well-studied problems in AI (Bualat et al. 2018).

7

Summary

NASA’s future exploration missions will require both smart
vehicles, smart robots, and decision support to aid astronauts. NASA is investing in AI technology, both internally
developed and commercial, to make this vision a reality.
Automated planning, plan execution, and fault management
technology using both automated reasoning and machine
learning, have all been developed and demonstrated in a variety of operational demonstrations, both onboard the ISS
and in analog environments. Figure 6 shows which AI and
associated technologies were used in each of ASO’s projects
except for (Frank et al. 2013), as well as quantitative information indicating the rough complexity of the problem
to be solved. These early investments will ensure the eventual AI solutions are robust and resilient to changes in environment, faults and failures, and also the somewhat unpredictable nature of human-machine collaboration. Lessons
learned on systems engineering and integration, both ’down’
to the ﬂight software, and ’up’ to the crew, will help design
the proper interactions both between AI components, and
between the AI components and the vehicle and its crew.

With further maturation of these AI technologies, NASA
will be ready to conduct its planned future human exploration missions.

References
Aaseng, G., and Frank., J. 2016. Transitioning autonomous
systems technology research to a ﬂight software environment. In Proceedings of the AIAA Conference on Space Operations.
Aaseng, G.; Barszcz, E.; Valdez, H.; and Moses, H. 2015.
Scaling up model-based diagnostic and fault effects reasoning for spacecraft. In Proceedings of the AIAA Conference
on Space Operations.
Aaseng, G.; Frank, J.; Iatauro, M.; Knight, C.; Levinson,
R.; Ossenfort, J.; Scott, M.; Sweet, A.; Csank, J.; Soeder,
J.; Loveless, A.; Carrejo, D.; Ngo, T.; and Greenwood., Z.
2018. Development and testing of a vehicle management
system for autonomous spacecraft habitat operations. In
Proceedings of the AIAA Space Conference and Exposition.
Aaseng, G.; Sweet, A.; and Ossenfort., J. 2018. Performance analysis of an autonomous fault management system.
In Proceedings of the AIAA Space Conference and Exposition.
Achterberg., T. 2009. SCIP: solving constraint integer programs. Math. Prog. Comp. 1:1 – 41.
Azimi, S.; Zemler, E.; and Morris, R. 2019. Autonomous
robotics manipulation for in-space intra-vehicle activity.
In Proceedings of the ICAPS Workshop on Planning and
Robotics.
Beaton, K. H.; Chappell, S. P.; Abercromby, A. F.; Miller,
M. J.; Nawotniak, S. E. K.; Brady, A. L.; Stevens, A. H.;
Payler, S. J.; Hughes, S. S.; and Lim, D. S. 2019. Using
science-driven analog research to investigate extravehicular
activity science operations concepts and capabilities for human planetary exploration. Astrobiology, Special Issue: The
BASALT Program 19(3):300–320.
Beisert, S.; Rodriggs, M.; Moreno, F.; Korth, D.; Gibson, S.;
Lee, Y. H.; and Eagles, D. 2013. Development and Execution of Autonomous Procedures Onboard the International
Space Station to Support the Next Phase of Human Space
Exploration. In Proceedings of the AIAA Space Conference
and Exposition.
Brown, R.; Braunstein, E.; Brunet, R.; Grace, R.; Vu, T.;
J.Busa; and W.Dwyer. 2002. Timeliner: Automating procedures on the ISS. In Proceedings of the AIAA Space Conference and Exposition.
Bualat, M.; Smith, T.; Fong, T. W.; Smith, E. E.; and
Wheeler, D. W. 2018. Astrobee: A new tool for ISS operations. In Proceedings of the AIAA Conference on Space
Operations.
Coles, A. J.; Coles, A. I.; Fox, M.; and Long, D. 2010.
Forward-chaining partial-order planning. In Proceedings of
the 20th International Conference on Automated Planning
and Scheduling.
Cornelius, R., and Frank, J. 2016. International Space Station (ISS) payload autonomous operations past, present and

Monitoring
Planning
Execution
Fault Mgt
Anomaly Detection
User Interfaces
Flight Software
Machine Learning

SSC
161
161
-

TOCA
22
6/10
70
17

Orion ACAWS
2500
3500
-

Robotics
54
70/28
70
-

AMO EXPRESS
236
59
-

Habitat VSM
208
312/25
312
159
38

Orion VSM
5000
5000
-

Figure 6: AI and associated technology used for ASO projects. For Monitoring, entry indicates the number of distinct monitored parameters; for Robotics, monitored parameters equals number of states in the planning domain. For Planning, entry x/y
indicates plan size/constraints; for Robotics, constraints equals number of distinct action types. For Fault Mgt, entry indicates
number of detectable faults. For Anomaly Detection, entry indicates how many parameters are used to detect anomalies.
future. In Proceedings of the AIAA Conference on Space
Operations.
Crusan, J. C.; Smith, R. M.; Craig, D. A.; Caram, J. M.;
Guidi, J.; Gates, M.; Krezel, J. M.; and Herrmann, N. 2018.
Deep Space Gateway concept: Extending human presence
into cislunar space. In Proceedings of the IEEE Aerospace
Conference.
Csank, J.; Soeder, J.; Follo, J.; Muscatello, M.; Hau, Y. H.;
and Carbone, M. 2018. An intelligent autonomous power
controller for the nasa human deep space gateway. In Proceedings of the AIAA International Energy Conversion Engineering Conference.
Frank, J.; Spirkovska, L.; McCann, R.; Wang, L.; Pohlkamp,
K.; and Morin, L. 2013. Autonomous Mission Operations.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Aerospace Conference.
Frank, J.; Iverson, D.; Knight, C.; Narasimhan, S.; Swanson, K.; Scott, M.; Windrem, M.; Pohlkamp, K.; Mauldin,
J.; McGuire, K.; and Moses., H. 2015. Demonstrating
autonomous mission operations onboard the international
space station. In Proceedings of the AIAA Space Conference
and Exposition.
Frank, J.; McGuire, K.; Moses, H.; and Stephenson., J. 2017.
Developing decision aids to enable human spaceﬂight autonomy. AI Magazine Special Issue on Turn Taking and Coordination in Human Computer Interaction, 37(4):46 – 54.
Ghallab, M.; Nau, D.; and Traverso, P. 2004. Automated
Planning: Theory and Practice. Morgan Kauffman.
Iverson, D. 2004. Inductive System Health Monitoring. In
Proceedings of the International Confernce on Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
Marquez, J.; Hillenius, S.; Deliz, I.; Kanefsky, R.; Zheng, J.;
and Reagan, M. 2017. Increasing crew autonomy for long
duration exploration missions: Self-scheduling. In Proceedings of the AIAA Space Conference and Exposition.
Mathur, A.; Deb, S.; and Pattipati, K. 1998. Modeling and
real-time diagnostics in TEAMS-RT. In Proceedings of the
American Control Conference.
May, R.; Soeder, J. F.; Beach, R. F.; George, P. J.; Frank, J.;
Schwabacher, M. A.; Wang, L.; and Lawler, D. 2014. An
architecture to enable autonomous control of spacecraft. In
AIAA Propulsion and Energy Conference.

McComas, D.; Wilmot, J.; and Cudmore, A. 2016. The
Core Flight System (cFS) community: Providing low cost
solutions for small spacecraft. In Proceedings of the 30th
AIAA /USU Conference on Small Satellites.
Narasimham, S., and Brownstone, L. 2007. HyDE - a general framework for stochastic and hybrid model - based diagnosis. In Proceedings of the 18th International Workshop
on the Principles and Practices of Diagnosis, 162 – 169.
NASA.
2018.
Spaceﬂight demonstration of a
power and propulsion element (ppe).
https:
//www.fbo.gov/spg/NASA/GRC/OPDC20220/
80GRC018R0005/listing.html. See Amendment 6:
Unique Requirements.
Rader, S. N.; Regan, M. L.; Janoiko, B.; and Johnson, J. E.
2013. Human-in-the-Loop Operations Over Time Delay:
NASA Analog Missions Lessons Learned. In Proceedings
of the AIAA International Conference on Environmental Systems.
Smith, E.; Korsmeyer, D. J.; Hall, V. F.; Marquez, J.; Iverson, D.; Trimble, J.; Keller, R. M.; Frank, J.; Chachere, J.;
and Clancey., W. J. 2014. Exploration technologies for operations. In Proceedings of the AIAA Conference on Space
Operations.
Stetson, H.; Frank, J.; Haddock, A.; Cornelius, R.; Wang,
L.; and Garner., L. 2015. AMO EXPRESS: A command
and control experiment for crew autonomy. In Proceedings
of the AIAA Space Conference and Exposition.
Verma, V.; J´ nsson, A.; Pasareanu, C.; and Iatauro, M. 2006.
o
Universal executive and PLEXIL: Engine and language for
robust spacecraft control and operations. In Proceedings of
the AIAA Space Conference.
Williams-Byrd, J.; Antol, J.; Jefferies, S.; Goodliff, K.;
Williams, P.; Ambrose, R.; Sylvester, A.; Anderson, M.;
Dinsmore, C.; Hoffman, S.; Lawrence, J.; Seiber, M.; Schier,
J.; Frank, J.; Alexander, L.; Ruff, G.; Soeder, J.; Guinn, J.;
and Stafford, M. 2016. Design considerations for spacecraft operations during uncrewed dormant phases of human
exploration missions. In Proceedings of the International
Astronautical Congress.

